www.it-ebooks.info
Beginning Big Data 
with Power BI and 
Excel 2013
Neil Dunlop
www.it-ebooks.info
Beginning  Big Data with Power BI and Excel 2013
Copyright © 2015 by Neil Dunlop 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the 
material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with 
reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed 
on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or 
parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its 
current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be 
obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under 
the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-0530-3 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-0529-7 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol with 
every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image, we use the names, logos, and images only in an 
editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademak.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are 
not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject to 
proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, 
neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or 
omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the 
material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr  
Lead Editor: Jonathan Gennick 
Development Editor: Douglas Pundick
Technical Reviewer: Kathi Kellenberger
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Gary Cornell, Louise Corrigan, Jim DeWolf,  
Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Susan McDermott, 
Matthew Moodie, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Gwenan Spearing,  
Matt Wade, Steve Weiss
Coordinating Editor: Jill Balzano
Copy Editor: Michael G. Laraque 
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global 
Artist: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a California LLC  
and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance Inc).  
SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation. 
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. 
eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our Special 
Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author in this text is available to  
readers at www.apress.com. For additional information about how to locate and download your book’s 
source code, go to www.apress.com/source-code/. 
www.it-ebooks.info
