Many people cite context as being something that makes DAX difficult to learn. However, there is nothing truly difficult about the concept of context. In fact, if you completed the previous section Creating a DAX Measure, you have already been introduced to context when you clicked on the individual columns within the Clustered column chart which, in turn, changed the number displayed by the Average Total Cost measure in the Card visual. That’s context. In other words, context is simply the filters that affect a calculation in DAX.
For DAX columns, when referencing individual columns such as with the Total Cost column created in Creating a DAX Column, row context is in effect. In other words, the calculation is filtered to only the current row. Therefore, referencing [Price] returns the value of the Price column for the current row. Refer to Figure 1.30 for a visual representation of row context:
Figure 1.30: Row context.
However, if you instead created a column in Table that included an aggregation of a column, such as the following:
Average Price = AVERAGE( [Price] )  Then the same number, 3.79 is displayed for all rows for the Average Price column. This is because when using aggregations in DAX calculated columns, the entire table is in context. In other words, there are no filters. Refer to Figure 1.31 for clarification:
Figure 1.31: Aggregators in DAX columns breaks row context.
With an understanding of context for DAX columns, we now turn our attention to context for DAX measures. To better understand how context or filters affect DAX measures, create a table visual with the Item column and the measure, Average Total Cost. If necessary, refer to the previous section in this chapter, Creating a Visual.
If you have not completed Creating a DAX Measure, simply download and open CreatingADAXMeasure.pbix from the Chapter 1 folder of the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/gdeckler/DAX-For-Humans/tree/main/book
Note that the Average Total Cost measure returns individual values for each row in the Table visual. This is because each row of the table visual has a different context or filters. The Banana row filters the data to just the Banana rows in the data. There are two Banana rows in the source data with Total Costs of 8.97 and 14.95 respectively. Thus, the average is ( 8.97 + 14.95 ) / 2 = 23.92 / 2 = 11.96. This is perhaps better explained in Figure 1.32:
Figure 1.32: Visual’s internal filter context for a measure.
As shown in Figure 1.32, the value of the Item column for a row in the Table visual filters the underlying data table to just the rows that match the same value for Item (in this case “Banana”). Thus, only the Banana rows are in context (filtered) for the measure calculation.
The same is true for the Grapefruit row. The Grapefruit row in the table visual filters the source data to the single Grapefruit row which has a Total Cost of 14.97 and thus the average of that single row is also 14.97.
This same pattern holds for the Pickle row as well. However, the Total row does not filter the data at all and thus the 12.57 number displayed is the average of all of the Total Cost rows within the source data.
DAX measure context can also be affected by filters coming from outside of a visual as well as inside a visual such as with the Table visual just discussed. This can be seen when selecting an individual column within the Clustered column chart visual which filters the data available to the Card visual and thus the Average Total Cost measure within that Card visual. This process is similar to filters internal to a visual and can be seen visually in Figure 1.33:
Figure 1.33: Visual’s external filter context for a measure.
In fact, the external filters affecting a visual can be viewed by clicking the funnel icon that appears when hovering over a visual as shown in Figure 1.34:
Figure 1.34: Filter context for a measure.
Thus, the context for a DAX measure can come from filters internal to a visual as well as external to a visual, such as selections in other visuals or filters propagated from the Filters fly-out pane. Finally, as we will see shortly, context (filters) can also come from within the DAX calculation itself (see Filtering section in this chapter).
For complex scenarios, tracking down the exact context affecting a DAX measure calculation can be tricky so we will explore more about this topic throughout this book. For now, let’s first learn how to “think” in DAX.