Handling errors in DAX is both a necessity and a skill that separates resilient models from brittle ones. DAX does not fail silently. When something goes wrong, DAX usually throws a visible error that often breaks the display of visuals. These messages, while sometimes cryptic, are signals that the logic or calculation needs refinement. Common causes of DAX errors include type mismatches, incorrect use of context-modifying functions, or referencing columns or measures that return incompatible structures. Understanding the source of these issues requires familiarity with evaluation context, function categories, and the semantic model's relationships.
To manage and prevent errors proactively, DAX offers functions like ERROR, IFERROR, and ISERROR. These functions can generate and catch errors and return alternative values or fallback logic to maintain a smooth user experience. For example, IFERROR( [Measure], 0 ) ensures that a blank or erroneous calculation doesn’t disrupt a report visual with an error message. When used thoughtfully, error handling in DAX not only safeguards your report and model from breaking but also improves interpretability, especially in dynamic reporting environments where data changes frequently or user inputs vary.
The ERROR function allows you to raise your own custom errors. To demonstrate this, create the following measure:
Error = ERROR( "Something bad happened" )  Placing this measure into a Card visual predictably breaks the visual. Clicking on the See details link displays the custom error message:
Figure 16.5: Generating a custom error message
To prevent the visual from breaking, we can use ISERROR or IFERROR. For example, create the following two measures:
IsError =  IF(  ISERROR(  ERROR( "Something bad happened" )  ),  "Something bad happened",  "Everything is good"  ) IfError =  IFERROR(  ERROR( "Something bad happened" ),  "Something bad happened"  )  Placing each of these measures into their own Card visuals displays “Something bad happened” for both visuals.
Obviously, simply repeating the error message as text is likely not an effective solution for most situations and neither is simply using the ERROR function to generate an error. Both are used simply as examples. Instead, one can use the IFERROR function like a try/catch block in other programming languages. In the event of an error, the second parameter can instead attempt to perform a different calculation or return an alternate value. For example, consider the following measure:
IfError 2 = IFERROR( 100 / 1, 0 )  This measure returns the value 100. However, this next measure:
IfError 3 = IFERROR( 100 / 0, 0 )  This measure returns 0 since dividing by zero generates an error. Note that it is possible to nest IFERROR statements.
IFERROR and ISERROR statements should be used sparingly in production calculations because both functions can negatively impact the performance of a measure in a significant way. In the case of the IfError2 and IfError3 measures, a better solution would be to use the error tolerant function, DIVIDE. Other error tolerant functions include SELECTEDVALUE, LOOKUPVALUE, FIND, and SEARCH.
Now that we understand error handling in DAX, let’s next look at debugging context.